Daedalus and Icarus
On the island of Crete there lived a Minotaur,
a ferocious creature that was half man and
half bull. The people of the island of Crete
were terrifi ed of the Minotaur; it loved nothing
more than to feast on human fl esh. They
begged their ruler, King Minos, to order that
the creature be killed, but the King decided
against this. Instead, he constructed a plan to
imprison the Minotaur. To die at the hands of
the Minotaur would be one of the most terrible
deaths imaginable, and King Minos believed
that his enemies deserved to meet such a fate.
He enlisted the help of Daedalus, a talented
architect, inventor and craftsman, and asked
him to build a labyrinth – a maze of passages
that would be so complex that it would be
virtually impossible for anyone (or anything) to
ever fi nd a way out.
Daedalus did as King Minos requested and
then, following the King’s instructions,
he enticed the Minotaur into the labyrinth
by leaving a huge pile of fresh meat in its
centre. Once the Minotaur was in the
labyrinth the creature was unable to
escape. King Minos was delighted.
Anyone who was sent to the labyrinth
would be trapped and eventually they
would be found by the Minotaur who
would eat them alive. Now he had the
perfect punishment for his enemies!
Deciding he had no further use for
Daedalus, the King threw him into the
labyrinth along with his son Icarus.
The King expected that the inventor
and his son would be found by the
Minotaur and eaten. Instead, unknown
to the king, they escaped. After all,
Daedalus had built the labyrinth and
knew his way around! 
Once out of the labyrinth Deadulus and Icarus
carefully made their way to the shore of the
island and pondered on what to do next. The
trees and bushes surrounding the beach would
provide an ideal sanctuary for the time being.
They could possibly survive for months or
years without being seen. But who would want
to live like that – hiding away hoping they
would not be captured? They needed to fi nd a
way to leave the island, but how? They could
not swim, the nearest land was too far away,
and they would never make it. They could not
leave by ship; all vessels were controlled by
King Minos. Daedalus stared up at the sky
and the seagulls that circled overhead. If only
he was as free as a bird. If only he and his
son could just fl y away … and then he had an
idea which was both brilliant and ambitious.
He would build a pair of wings! It would take
some time, days, weeks even, but he would
build a pair of wings for his son and himself – 
exactly the same as the wings of a seagull but
on a much larger scale.
Scattered around the beach were seagull
feathers. Daedalus instructed his son to collect
as many as he could fi nd. He worked carefully
to build the wings, studying the exact angle
and shape of the seagulls and examining how
the birds fl ew. At last, six weeks after they had
escaped from the labyrinth, the wings were
ready.
‘With these wings you will fl y like a bird,’
Daedalus told his son, ‘but be careful. Make
sure you do not fl y too close to the Sun. If you
do, the wax that holds the feathers together will
melt.’
Icarus nodded quickly. In truth he was barely
listening. Hiding on the shore of the island of
Crete had been boring. He had spent weeks
doing nothing more exciting with his days
than collecting feathers and catching fi sh for
his father and himself to eat. And now at last
they had the chance to escape. He shuffl ed
impatiently as his father attached the wings to
his arms, then helped his father to
position his own wings.
‘We are ready,’ his father told
him, ‘follow me!’
Deadulus ran forwards towards
the ocean, sweeping his arms
up and down as he did so. With
a whoosh he zoomed forward,
rising into the air. Icarus copied
his father; suddenly he found
his feet were no longer on the
ground…he was in the air… he
was fl ying! He couldn’t believe
it! As he looked down at the sea
Daedulus and Icarus
below, his heart fl uttered with excitement. It
was as though his body was weightless. The
wind whistled against his ears. He felt like a
bird! Higher and higher, faster and faster he
fl ew!
Suddenly, Icarus realized he could hardly see
his father. He had fl own so high his father
resembled a small dot below him. At the same
time he noticed a feather drift past and fl oat
downwards towards the sea. And then another
… and then another. Too late Icarus realized
his wings were melting. He had fl own too close
to the Sun. With every desperate swoop of his
arms, more feathers fell and soon his arms
were almost bare. Down and down and down
went Icarus...
‘Father!’ he shouted before falling with a heavy
splash into the sea. His few remaining feathers
fl oated on the surface of the water as he sank.
Daedalus could only watch helplessly and
his heart felt as heavy as a stone as he fl ew
onwards, leaving his son behind.